JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
White House
kicks up an already hot issue by
directing
all public schools to allow
transgender students
to use the bathroom matching
their gender
identity.
Then: how one man's mission to
reform the
nation's justice system began by
confronting
Alabama's overcrowded prisons.
BRYAN STEVENSON, Founder, Equal
Justice Initiative:
If you said to any warden in the
state of
Alabama, can you identify 50,
100, 200 people
in your prison who you think
could go home
tomorrow, wouldn't be a problem,
most of them
could do it in a heartbeat.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields
and Michael Gerson talk about
the possibility
of a united Republican Party and
analyze a
full week of news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The political and
social struggle
over bathrooms and gender blew
up today. The
spark came from a letter sent to
school districts
across the nation by the federal
government,
and it drew immediate
condemnation from conservative
states.
For the nation's public schools,
the issue
was already simmering. After
today's federal
directive, it's on the front
burner, that
is, provide transgender students
with access
to suitable bathrooms and locker
rooms that
match their chosen gender
identity.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
The challenge here is not to
isolate anybody.
It's not to discriminate against
anybody.
It's not to make anybody unsafe.
It's actually
to ensure that our schools are
as inclusive
and respectful and safe as they
can possibly
be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S.
Departments of Justice
and Education issued the
directive in a formal
letter to school districts. It
doesn't impose
new legal requirements.
Instead, it cites Title IX's
existing protections
against sex discrimination that
are tied to
federal funding. According to
the directive:
"When a student or parent
notifies the school
administration that the student
will assert
a gender identity that differs
from previous
records, the school will begin
treating the
student consistent with that
gender identity."
U.S. Attorney General Loretta
Lynch said the
goal is to protect against
harassment and
address unjust policies in local
schools.
The transgender community
welcomed the news.
ALEX SINGH, Student: We have
someone who's
very powerful able to help us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Chicago student
Alex Singh
transitioned from female to male
two years
ago. He appeared in a
"Frontline" documentary,
"Growing Up Trans," on PBS last
year.
ALEX SINGH: When I first came
out, I was in
seventh grade, and before then,
going to the
bathroom was kind of
uncomfortable for me,
as it would be for any guy going
into the
female restroom. It was very
uncomfortable,
very nerve-racking. I just felt
out of place
and like I didn't belong.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And high
schoolers in Arlington,
Virginia, offered their own
reactions today.
QUMARI MARTIN, Student: Equal
rights is just
-- it's a part of our
government, our amendments.
Like, I don't think it should
be, like, based
on gender. If you're a U.S.
citizen, you should
be treated like one.
CELINA CORDOVA, Student: I would
feel comfortable
going into the bathroom,
because, obviously,
they think that they're female,
and I'm female,
so they wouldn't harm me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the backlash
began almost
immediately.
LT. GOV. DAN PATRICK (R), Texas:
We will not
be blackmailed by the
president's 30 pieces
of silver. We will not sell out
our children
to the federal government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Texas,
Lieutenant Governor
Dan Patrick urged his state's
school superintendents
to defy the Obama
administration, even if
it means forfeiting billions in
federal aid.
LT. GOV. DAN PATRICK: He's
either paying back
the lesbian, gay and transgender
community
that helped him defeat Hillary
Clinton in
2008, or he believes in this
policy. I don't
know for what reason he's doing
it, but it
is the most damaging policy,
domestic policy
-- and that's saying something
for this president,
who gave us Obamacare -- the
most damaging
public policy he has put forth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: North Carolina
Govern Pat McCrory
takes a similar stance. His
state and the
Justice Department are already
suing each
other over a new state law
restricting public
bathroom use to a person's birth
gender.
GOV. PAT MCCRORY (R), North
Carolina: This
is an issue which is really
about privacy
vs. equality and that balance.
When you go
to a restroom or to a locker
room or to a
shower facility, there is an
expectation of
privacy, that the only other
people in that
room, in a very private moment,
I might add,
will be people of the same
gender.
EMILY, Parent: She said, "Mom, I
think there's
a boy changing in my locker
room."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Some parents are
worried as
well. This woman in Clovis,
California, where
schools already follow a state
gender identity
law, expressed her concern this
week.
EMILY: I understand that times
are changing
and that there are issues that
need to be
addressed. I totally, completely
understand
that, but I don't think that
this is the right
solution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in another
development,
the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services
issued new rules today saying
transgender
people can't be denied health
care by professional
providers who receive federal
funding.
The transgender bathroom battle
also spilled
over into the presidential race
today. Republican
Donald Trump was asked about it
during phone-ins
to morning TV talk shows. He
said -- quote
-- "Everybody has to be
protected," but he
argued it is not a federal
issue.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I think the states should make
the decision.
They're more capable of making
I felt that from the beginning.
I just think
it should be states' rights. I
think many,
many things actually should be
states' rights,
but this is a perfect example of
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The two
Democratic presidential
candidates, Hillary Clinton and
Bernie Sanders,
had no immediate reaction.
We will get a full airing of the
issue right
after the news summary.
The pharmaceutical giant Pfizer
has announced
that it will no longer allow its
drugs to
be used in lethal injections.
With that decision
today, all federally approved
drug suppliers
have now blocked sales of their
products to
prison systems. A number of
states using the
death penalty have begun buying
the drugs
covertly.
Russian President Vladimir Putin
stepped up
his criticism of NATO missile
defense sites
in Poland. Putin scoffed at U.S.
arguments
that the system is aimed at
Iranian missiles
and not at Russia. He told
Russian military
officials -- quote -- "We will
have to think
about how we can fend off the
threats.'
Meanwhile, Polish and American
officials symbolically
broke ground for a new missile
interceptor
site. Another site went
operational yesterday.
In Iraq, Islamic State militants
attacked
for a third straight day. This
time, the target
was the Shiite town of Balad,
about 50 miles
north of Baghdad. Two suicide
bombers and
gunmen stormed a busy coffee
shop there, killing
at least 13 people. Four more
were killed
in a second attack later. ISIS
bombings earlier
this week killed nearly 100
civilians and
soldiers.
The U.S. Transportation Security
Administration
is appealing for patience as
travelers face
growing security delays at
airports. Lines
have gotten longer in the face
of tighter
security procedures and fewer
transportation
security officers, or TSOs.
At Washington's Reagan National
Airport today,
the secretary of homeland
security, Jeh Johnson,
promised corrective action.
JEH JOHNSON, U.S. Secretary of
Homeland Security:
Our job is to keep the American
public safe.
We're dealing this spring and
summer with
increased travel volume, which
obviously puts
an added burden on our TSOs and
increased
demand on the system. But we're
not going
to compromise aviation security
in the face
of this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congress agreed
this week to
inject more money into the TSA
to hire more
officers and take other steps.
In the meantime,
officials are warning passengers
to arrive
at least two hours ahead of
their flights.
A cyber-heist that stole $81
million from
a Bangladesh bank now appears to
be part of
a wider campaign. The global
financial network
SWIFT reported today the same
hackers also
hit an unnamed Vietnamese bank.
And Europe's
largest weapons company, BAE
Systems, said
the same malware is linked to
the cyber-attack
on Sony's Hollywood studio in
2014.
Wall Street's week ended with a
sell-off,
led by retail and bank stocks.
The Dow Jones
industrial average lost 185
points to close
at 17535. The Nasdaq fell 19
points, and the
S&P 500 slipped 17. For the
entire week, the
Dow was down 1 percent. The
Nasdaq and the
S&P were off about
half-a-percent.
General Lori J. Robinson made
history today,
taking over NORAD, the North
American Aerospace
Defense Command. A ceremony in
Colorado Springs
made her the first woman to head
a U.S. combat
command. She's one of only two
female four-star
generals in the Air Force. She
is said to
have a keen interest in space,
cyber-security
and drones.
And the woman believed to be the
world's oldest
person, Susannah Mushatt Jones,
has died at
the age of 116. She passed away
Thursday at
a seniors home in Brooklyn, New
York. Jones
was born in Alabama in 1899, and
moved north
as a young woman. She never
drank or smoked,
but said she did eat bacon every
day. Susannah
Mushatt Jones was the last
living American
from the 19th century.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
reaction
to the Obama administration's
sweeping directive
on public school bathrooms; a
key Hezbollah
leader killed in Syria; why some
see Alabama's
overcrowded prisons as a sign of
racial injustice;
and much more.
The battle over the use of
school facilities
by transgender students has
already flared
up in North Carolina and in
other communities,
including in Southeastern
Virginia and a Chicago
suburb.
But the directive to all U.S.
public schools
from the Obama administration
spreads it across
the nation.
Hari Sreenivasan is in our New
York studios
tonight, and has more on the
reaction and
possible impact.
HARI SREENIVASAN: I'm joined by
two people
who have been involved on both
sides of this
issue.
Alex Myers is an English teacher
at Phillips
Exeter Academy, a private school
in New Hampshire.
He's also an author and speaks
frequently
about gender identity. He's
transgender, came
out in high school and was the
first openly
transgender student to attend
Harvard. And
Jeremy Tedesco is senior legal
counsel with
Alliance Defending Freedom, a
faith-based
legal advocacy group. It
represents several
groups of parents that oppose
allowing students
to use school bathrooms based on
gender identity.
Alex, let me start with you.
Why is this so significant to
you?
ALEX MYERS, Teacher, Phillips
Exeter Academy:
This is really a moment of
recognition that
is unparalleled.
I think the transgender
community has been
existing at the margins not only
of mainstream
society, but also in some ways
of the LGBT
community. And President Obama's
and Loretta
Lynch's statement earlier this
week really
bring us out of the shadows and
into the mainstream.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jeremy
Tedesco, your organization
is involved in two different
lawsuits in Chicago
and in North Carolina to try to
prevent these
types of policies from rolling
out.
Are there a lot of students not
transgender
who are trying to go into the
other bathrooms,
so to speak? I mean, why is this
a step too
far?
JEREMY TEDESCO, Alliance
Defending Freedom:
Well, I really appreciate you
having us on.
And I'm glad we can be on PBS
and have a civil
discourse about this whole
issue.
The reality is, ADF, Alliance
Defending Freedom,
where I work, has been pushing
out policies
to school districts for several
years now,
policies that are promote a
compassionate
alternative that meets the needs
of every
student at the school.
So, our policy says students who
for whatever
reason are uncomfortable using
the locker
room or shower or restroom
designated for
their biological sex should be
given alternative
facilities, single-stall
facilities or whatever
is available at the school.
Almost all schools
have those available.
But they shouldn't allow the
privacy rights
of other students to be violated
in providing
those accommodations. There's
interests, rights
on both sides of the equation in
the bathroom
and locker room contexts.
Students have an
expectation of privacy in those
facilities.
And the Obama administration is
completely
trampling those rights by
directing schools
to just let students of one sex
into the locker
rooms and restrooms of students
of the other
sex.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Alex, how is a
school supposed
to strike this balance to try to
protect the
privacy of all students, as
Jeremy says, not
just the transgender ones?
ALEX MYERS: Well, I first think
that the basic
thing a school needs to do is
educate and
train faculty, administration
and students,
just so people are aware.
I think a lot of the problems
are actually
caused by ignorance, rather than
actual incidents.
But in terms of privacy and in
terms of what
was just outlined, I think that
the problem
with having a separate
single-gender, single-use
bathroom is that you're really
mandating that
something that sounds like
separate but equal,
when we want is for people to
coexist together,
for there not to be segregation
of any kind.
In terms of privacy rights, I
think you might
be looking at modifying
particularly locker
room facilities to allow every
student, cisgender
and transgender, for more
privacy. And I think
that what you will find largely
is that transgender
want to go into restrooms, want
to go into
locker rooms, they want to use
those facilities,
they want to use discreetly, and
they value
their own privacy.
And they are not likely to
intrude on others.
I would also add that I find I
rather ironic
that, at this point in time, the
conservative
movement is mentioning privacy
as a right,
when, for so many years, they
enacted and
enforced sodomy laws, which had
no respect
for people's privacy.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jeremy, in the
joint letter
today from the DOJ and the
Department of Education,
there were examples of school
districts from
Alaska to Kansas City to
Massachusetts that
all have created policies in
figuring a way
through this without any
lawsuits.
Why aren't these fixes good
enough? Sometimes,
it was as simple as a stall with
a door or
a curtain.
JEREMY TEDESCO: Well, if you put
a stall -- for
instance, the Illinois lawsuit,
where we filed
the lawsuit against the
Department of Education
and a school district outside of
Chicago,
they did install a few privacy
stalls inside
the girls locker room, but that
doesn't solve
anything, because those stalls
are inside
the locker room.
And the biologically male
student has to walk
through the locker room while
girls are changing
for P.E. class. They are in a
state of undress.
That happens every day of the
year, every
year of school, because P.E. is
a mandatory
class at that school.
So these girls have to suffer
the humiliation,
the degradation, the affront to
their dignity
and the privacy violations on an
everyday
basis in the school. It doesn't
solve the
problem. See, privacy rights say
that a person
of the opposite sex, they stop
at the door
to the locker room, not at some
door to some
private stall inside the locker
room.
The bar is at the door to the
locker room.
And that's -- just that's
consistent with
the expectation of privacy that
we have always
had in our society when it comes
to the use
of these kinds of facilities.
And, again,
that right is protected by the
U.S. Constitution.
And so what the Obama
administration is promoting
is something that tramples the
privacy rights
and the dignity of girls at
schools across
the country and boys. You know,
in Illinois,
we have 63 student plaintiffs,
130-plus plaintiffs
altogether. These people, you
know, they're
religious, they're not
religious.
You know, privacy is something
that cuts across
religious and ideological lines,
and these
people just want their
children's right to
privacy protected by their
schools and by
the federal government.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Alex, what do
you say to
those parents who are in this
lawsuit?
ALEX MYERS: I think that the
time has come
to be a little bit more educated
and a little
bit more open.
I really have not heard of any
incidents of
harassment or assault. I'm not
aware of there
being any legitimate problems
that have been
voiced by cisgender students.
And, again,
I think that the majority, the
vast majority,
the overwhelming majority of
transgender people
who use public facilities want
to do so with
respect to their own privacy and
their own
discretion.
It simply has not risen to any
attention that
I know of that there's been any
problem with
the use there.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jeremy
Tedesco, on your
site, there -- you also seem to
be drawing
almost an inference that
allowing transgender
people these rights is the
equivalent to shielding
sexual predators.
The examples that you cite on
the blog repeatedly
seem like either people who are
political
activists or perhaps sexual
predators. Are
you trying to equate the two
groups?
JEREMY TEDESCO: Well, of course
not.
And we don't think that
providing access to
people who are truly struggling
with gender
identity issues is going to be a
safety problem.
The problem is that these laws
allow people
to simply self-identify as the
opposite sex
and gain access.
You can't tell me, based on all
the evidence
that's out there, that people
who have, you
know, unconscionable purposes,
that want to,
you know, take advantage of
these kind of
policies, use them as a ruse to
gain access
will not do so.
I mean, look, there is a
criminal element
out there that will do that. We
need to recognize
that, as a culture, but we also
the privacy problems. You know,
the idea that
there hasn't been any kind of
report of some
kind of safety problem in a
particular situation
or a particular school really
doesn't respond
to the problem.
The problem is the privacy
violation, the
incredible amount of
uncomfortability, humiliation,
degradation and embarrassment
that our clients
in Illinois, for instance, the
girls in the
locker room, experience on a
daily basis.
Some of the girls in our lawsuit
aren't using
the restroom very much at
school. They're
holding it all day long. We have
another girl
who wears her gym clothes under
her regular
clothes, so she doesn't have to
undress in
the locker room.
And then she has to wear soiled,
dirty gym
clothes the rest of the day just
so she can
try to preserve her privacy and
her dignity
in the locker room. We shouldn't
be doing
that as a culture.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Alex Myers,
there is not
necessarily a card that you get
when you're
transgender. How do you get over
that sort
of identification problem, when
a transgender
individual or any individual
wants to identify
and go into an opposite locker
room? What's
going to be the simple rule that
works at
the parks and recreation
department or high
school?
ALEX MYERS: I think that you
find most transgender
people use the bathroom that
they feel matches
their gender identity and that
they can pass
in, so that the one that they're
going to
walk into and not be kicked out
of, the one
that they're going to walk into
and not cause
an incident.
It really takes special
circumstances for
a transgender person to walk
into a space
where they know they are going
to be rejected.
That's when the fear of
harassment and abuse,
in my mind, comes to light.
And I would simply say that
there simply hasn't
been a case of any abuse or
harassment or
any problem of a person being a
predator in
these spaces posing as a
transgender person.
Transgender people have been
using public
facilities that match their
gender identity
for years and years, and that
simply hasn't
happened yet.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jeremy
Tedesco, finally,
I want to ask you. There are
going to be people
watching this interview thinking
to themselves
almost everything that the
plaintiffs in these
cases that he's representing, if
you just
substituted the word transgender
with race,
this sounds like what people
said 50 years
ago.
JEREMY TEDESCO: Well, there is
simply no comparison.
I mean, here's the thing. Title
IX, which
is at the source of all of this,
which, by
the way, oh, the Obama
administration is radically
reinterpreting and just ignoring
Congress'
will by forcing its political
agenda on the
country, Title IX, for over 40
years, has
said that schools can comply
with Title IX
by having separate facilities,
locker rooms,
restrooms and showers for girls
and for boys.
That is not the equivalent of
race discrimination,
and the suggestion that it is,
is just a tactic
to try to get people to shut up
and not express
their opinions about this kind
of a topic.
It's not the same thing. It's
been recognized
under the law for 40-plus years.
It's a entirely
rationale and reasonable
division between
the sexes in those kinds of
facilities.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Jeremy Tedesco,
Alex Myers, thank you both.
ALEX MYERS: Thank you.
JEREMY TEDESCO: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thanks to you
all.
And there is much more online,
including our
report this week on how the U.S.
military
is working on its new rules for
transgender
service members. That's on our
home page.
Plus, you can watch
"Frontline"'s full documentary,
"Growing Up Trans." That is
streaming now
at PBS.org/Frontline.
Word came today that the man
believed to be
the top military commander of
Hezbollah was
killed in Syria. The
Iranian-backed group
has fought against the U.S. and
Israel since
it was founded in the early
1980s. And it
has joined forces with the Assad
regime in
the Syrian war.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
Jane Ferguson
has our report.
JANE FERGUSON: People in this
suburb of Beirut
have been to many funerals since
the beginning
of the war in Syria, but none as
big as this.
Mustafa Badreddine was believed
to be the
main military commander of
Hezbollah forces
fighting in Syria. In life, he
was a villain
to America and its allies. In
death, he is
a hero to these people.
In Hezbollah neighborhoods of
Beirut, the
funerals of war dead feel like
celebrations.
Women throw rice and rose petals
on the coffin
as it passes.
"I know there are martyrs in
Syria," this
woman says, "but we like that
and we are happy
because we give martyrdom. If we
didn't go
to Syria, ISIS would come to
here."
MAN: When the name of this dead
man is in
our minds, we will always
remember that we
have to fight. We have to get
revenge from
those who killed him.
JANE FERGUSON: Badreddine was
believed to
have been involved in the
devastating attack
on the U.S. Marine barracks in
Beirut in 1983,
which killed 241 Americans. He
was also indicted
for the assassination of
Lebanese Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri in a huge truck
bomb in 2005.
He was killed in Syria leading
Hezbollah's
military campaign, propping up
the group's
ally President Bashar al-Assad.
Young men
from here often go to fight in
Syria for Hezbollah,
many returning in coffins. It's
a heavy price
the group is paying for its
involvement in
the war.
The death of this commander,
however, is the
biggest loss to the group since
his predecessor
was killed in 2008. Mustafa
Badreddine, according
to Hezbollah, had said just a
few months ago
that he would only return to
Lebanon from
Syria either victorious or as a
martyr.
Professor Daniel Byman of
Georgetown University
says he was a founding member of
Hezbollah.
DANIEL BYMAN, Georgetown
University: Badreddine's
death is a big blow to
Hezbollah. He's someone
who was there at the founding of
the movement.
He's been with it in leadership
positions,
really the tip of the sphere
almost everywhere
they have been active, whether
it's been in
Kuwait, in Lebanon, now in
Syria.
And this is a tremendous blow.
It has repeatedly
lost senior leaders in its
history, and it
has repeatedly emerged strong
and committed.
So, it's not likely to change
things in the
country.
JANE FERGUSON: It's not clear
who was responsible
for his death. Badreddine would
have been
a target for both Israel and
extremist groups
fighting in Syria, like ISIS.
Hezbollah leaders say Badreddine
was killed
in a huge explosion in Damascus
and that they're
investigating who was behind the
attack. They
expect to make an announcement
in the coming
days.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Beirut.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields
and Michael Gerson analyze the
week's news;
and how advances in genetic
sequencing is
saving lives.
But, first, the latest
installment in our
series Broken Justice about new
approaches
to criminal justice.
Tonight, we have a conversation
with a noted
lawyer and author on questions
of sentencing,
overcrowding in prisons and
whether a series
of changes around the country go
far enough.
Jeffrey Brown traveled to
Alabama for our
report.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Equal Justice
Initiative
in Montgomery, Alabama, a
nonprofit founded
in 1989 by lawyer and civil
rights activist
Bryan Stevenson to represent
death row prisoners
and indigent and juvenile
defendants who he
argues have been denied
effective representation,
often due to racial bias.
In recent years, which included
the publication
of an acclaimed memoir, "Just
Mercy," Stevenson
has become a leading voice
nationally for
criminal justice reform.
I met him at his office in
Montgomery while
reporting on Alabama's
overcrowded prisons
and spike in prison violence.
BRYAN STEVENSON, Founder, Equal
Justice Initiative:
There were less than 5,000
people in Alabama's
prisons throughout most of the
1970s.
And then you had politicians
like you had
all over the country get
captivated, I'm going
to say intoxicated, by the
politics of fear.
JEFFREY BROWN: Intoxicated.
BRYAN STEVENSON: Yes,
intoxicated by the politics
of fear and anger. They began
competing with
each other over who could be the
toughest
on crime, and putting people in
prison became
the solution to virtually every
problem.
Drug addiction and drug
dependency, which
could have been seen as a health
issue, was
seen as a crime issue. The
growing freedom
that was emerging in the Deep
South for African-Americans,
who until just a decade earlier
couldn't vote,
couldn't go into schools, had to
be regulated.
So we used the criminal justice
system, and
you saw this massive increase in
the number
of people sent to jails or
prisons.
So, we went from about 5,000
people in the
1970s to 30,000 people today in
a state with
about 4.5 million people. That's
an unbelievably
high rate of incarceration.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you're seeing
this -- you're
seeing our incarceration system
as a continuation
of slavery, of a history of
racial injustice
in the country.
BRYAN STEVENSON: Well, I think
it's a continuation
of using crime narrative to
control social
and political dynamics that
can't be controlled
in more legitimate ways.
And we created this so-called
war on drugs,
and we targeted people of color,
and we got
everybody to buy into the fact
that if we
don't put these dangerous people
into jails
and prisons, we are none safe.
And that's
how we went nationwide from a
prison population
of about 300,000 in the 1970s to
2.3 million
today. And now we have the
highest rate of
incarceration in the world.
JEFFREY BROWN: And here in
Alabama, an extreme
model of it.
BRYAN STEVENSON: Exactly.
And it's rooted in this comfort
level with
reducing people to their worst
act and acting
in very extreme, harsh, punitive
ways. I mean,
a state that was shaped by
lynching as a response
to things like interracial sex,
or organizing
for better sharecropping
conditions, to use
lynching, calling these people
criminals,
has created a culture, an
environment where
then putting people in prison
for life with
no chance of parole for writing
a bad check
or being in possession of
marijuana didn't
seem so radical.
JEFFREY BROWN: Last year,
Alabama's Republican
legislature and governor passed
a law to reform
some of Alabama's sentencing
guidelines and
increase probation and parole
supervision.
Stevenson believes such measures
here and
elsewhere don't go nearly far
enough.
BRYAN STEVENSON: I think people
realize that
we're spending way too much
money on jails
and prisons. And I think that's
true in Alabama.
It's true nationwide. We went
from $6 billion
spent on jails and prisons in
the United States
in 1980 to $80 billion last
year.
And the recession was terrible
for everybody,
for everything, except criminal
justice reform,
because, all of a sudden, state
legislators
had to start asking harder
questions about
why we're spending so much money
to keep people
in jails or prison who are not a
threat to
public safety.
JEFFREY BROWN: And you think
it's more a concern
out of money than anything else
that is leading
to whatever discussion there is
about changes?
BRYAN STEVENSON: Well, I think
that's the
primary motivation. I do.
If we were a more affluent
today, if we had
more resources, I don't think
we'd have the
same interest. Too many people
in this state,
too many people in this country
don't care
if people who are in jails or
prisons are
abused. They don't care if
they're raped.
They don't care if they are
murdered. They
don't care if they're assaulted.
They don't
care about their victimization.
And, because of that, we haven't
responded
the way a just society, a decent
society is
supposed to respond when you see
abuse and
murder and rape and misconduct.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, if you had
your opportunity,
given where things are at right
now, what
is the one -- what's the most
important thing
that needs to happen?
BRYAN STEVENSON: Can I do two?
JEFFREY BROWN: OK.
BRYAN STEVENSON: I will -- the
two things
that I would do, I would commit
to reducing
the prison population by 5,000
people. Just
put out an arbitrary number like
that.
JEFFREY BROWN: Where do those
people go?
BRYAN STEVENSON: They will go
home. We have
5,000 people in our jails and
prisons that
could go home tomorrow that
wouldn't in any
way threaten public safety.
And you know who could help us
identify those
5,000 are the wardens at these
prisons. If
you said to any warden in the
state of Alabama,
can you identify 50, 100, 200
people in your
prison who you think could go
home tomorrow,
wouldn't be a problem, most of
them could
do it in a heartbeat.
We could get to that 5,000
number just like
that. And then we could take the
money we
save, the significant money that
we save,
and invest in better caregiving,
better management.
You have to have people running
prisons that
care about the incarcerated,
that are smart,
that aren't bullies, that aren't
reactionary,
that aren't kind of vindictive.
And then you
could begin to see improved
conditions.
JEFFREY BROWN: Are you more
optimistic nationally,
when you look at the large
picture?
BRYAN STEVENSON: I'm cautiously
optimistic.
But punishment is a local issue.
And the national
discourse will only have an
impact on places
like Alabama if people in
Alabama step up.
But I am generally hopeful. I
don't think
it's going to happen by itself,
and what I'm
worried about is that Congress
might pass
a few reforms, we might see
reforms here and
there, and we're going to
declare victory,
and three years from now, the
prison population
will have decreased by 1
percent, and we will
still be the most punitive
nation on the planet.
JEFFREY BROWN: Stevenson now has
a broader
educational project under way,
erecting markers
to remind people of a history
often ignored,
and his group is collecting
samples of earth
from the sites of lynchings,
with an aim toward
creating memorials around the
state.
I asked Stevenson what drives
him.
BRYAN STEVENSON: Well, I think,
when you see
what I see, you don't have a
choice. I think,
if most people saw what I see,
they'd have
the same instinct, they'd have
the same idea,
that we have to fix this,
because it's unconscionable.
We have kids, 15- and 16-year-
old kids, that
we're still putting in adult
jails and prisons
in Alabama. And what happens to
those children
is that they get abused, they
get assaulted.
And I don't think that there's a
decent person
watching this program that, if
they saw that,
wouldn't feel like, we have got
to stop that.
From Montgomery, Alabama, I'm
Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we turn to a
week in Republican
politics that saw the
presumptive presidential
nominee confront a divided
party, and one
in Democratic politics that saw
the underdog
candidate notch another primary
victory.
We analysis it all with Shields
and Gerson.
That is syndicated columnist
Mark Shields
and Washington Post columnist
Michael Gerson.
David Brooks is away tonight.
And we welcome both of you.
I want to start, Mark, with our
lead story
tonight, the administration,
Obama administration,
putting out a directive to
public schools
all over the country to make
bathroom, locker
room facilities available to
transgender students.
What effect do you see this
having?
MARK SHIELDS: In the real world
in education,
I'm not sure, Judy.
Politically, prior to today, the
politics
were all on the side of those
who had opposed
the North Carolina law, which
basically restricted
and came up with -- was sort of
a bogus boogeyman,
which I guess is redundant, that
there were
all these men putting on women's
clothes and
going into restrooms to molest
females.
I mean, it just -- but they
passed...
MICHAEL GERSON: Yes, solving a
problem that
didn't exist.
MARK SHIELDS: Exactly. Exactly.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was their
allegation.
MARK SHIELDS: And I really felt
that way.
And I think that obviously the
business community
reacted as one and cost North
Carolina great
amounts of PayPal jobs, Deutsche
Bank, Google,
Coca-Cola. A Bruce Springsteen
concert was
canceled.
So, there was a defensiveness.
Now, today,
this -- today's movement by the
president
strikes me that the silence on
the part of
Democrats, of Secretary
Clinton's campaign,
of Bernie Sanders' campaign, of
other Democrats
in leadership positions, I have
yet to hear
senators from the Hill or
governors.
So, I'm not sure. The federal
atom bomb of
federal spending, talking $3
billion in the
state of North Carolina, is an
enormous, enormous
weapon. But I'm not -- the lack
of enthusiastic
response from Secretary Clinton
and Senator
Sanders, I'm not sure that they
see it as
an unmixed political blessing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At least at this
point, we
don't know that they have
commented yet. We
haven't heard of any comment.
MARK SHIELDS: They didn't rush
to the microphones.
Put it that way.
MICHAEL GERSON: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Good way of
putting it.
Michael, how do you read the
political repercussions
from this?
MICHAEL GERSON: You know, I
don't know.
This is the kind of issue that
is normally
handled with culture norms, and
people making
compromises, and, you know,
meeting real needs,
because there is one here.
People should be
treated the way they want to be
treated. That's
a basic norm.
But now we have both sides
politicizing this,
raising it to the highest levels
of stakes,
likely to go in the courts, way
up in the
courts, resentment, conflict.
It's turned
into a culture war controversy.
And we take
issues like this that maybe
people of good
will could to some agreement on,
and run them
through this culture war machine
of our politics,
and then there has to be a
winner and a loser,
when, in fact, I think, on this
type of issue,
we have a long history of maybe
reasonable
people reaching accommodations
in their own
community.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're saying
that's what
the White House has done by
coming out with
this directive today, stirring
it up?
MICHAEL GERSON: I think it's an
overreach,
but I think the other side
overreached in
North Carolina as well, and by
politicizing
this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's turn now to
the story
I guess that had everybody
consumed, Mark,
this week in Washington, Donald
Trump.
Now that it looks like he has
wrapped up the
nomination, there is this dance,
this effort
under way to win over
Republicans, especially
Republicans here in Washington
who still have
not climbed on board, have not
endorsed him.
What did that look like to you?
There were
meetings. There were -- behind
closed doors.
Some of these Republicans have
come over and
said they will support him, but
others are
holding back.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, Judy.
House Speaker Paul Ryan being
the most visible,
I mean, a man who's earned his
credibility
and his reputation of being a
man of conviction
on issues like welfare, of
immigration reform,
of balancing the budget, of open
and free
trade, of controlling
entitlement spending
and limiting and privatizing
Medicare, met
with Donald Trump, who has run
against all
four, emphatically and loudly
four, and said he was a nice
man.
That's basically become the
default position
for Republicans who really don't
like Donald
Trump very much. Is he a nice
man? Lindsey
Graham is discovering in him
qualities of
warmth that had gone undetected
in their fight
during the primaries.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: And I think Paul
Ryan reflects
-- he's trying to provide some
cover to his
own suburban Republicans that
might be threatened
by a Donald Trump candidacy in
suburban districts,
where there's a question of
Trump being a
liability to Republicans.
And, at the same time, he
understands that
you're far better off having a
united party.
I think what has helped Donald
Trump, more
than anything else, is that the
first poll
that came out, the CNN poll
showing Hillary
Clinton with a 13-point lead,
54-41, and then
every poll since then has shown
the race a
lot closer, especially in
battleground states
of Ohio and Florida and
Pennsylvania even.
So, perhaps associating with him
is not the
political threat or liability
that it might
have been. And I think you will
see people
nudging over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But how do you --
what is the
thought process going on here,
Michael, on
the part of some of the members
of Congress
especially who were just
unalterably opposed
to him, were supporting others,
and now they
are moving over to his side?
MICHAEL GERSON: Yes. Yes.
I think MDNM-Ryan has laid the
predicate
for eventual surrender. I think
the normal
reaction here is to try to rally
the party,
to pick the lesser of two evils,
to find whatever
agreement you can and emphasize
it.
The problem is, this isn't a
normal circumstance.
You're not dealing with a man
that has some
different policy views, even on
big issues.
You're dealing with a man that's
not qualified
for the presidency, not
qualified morally
because he picks on minority
groups, not qualified
temperamentally.
I have seen what a president
looks like. It
doesn't look like this. And not
qualified
from background and experience,
and so I think
a lot of the political class is
dealing with
this as one of the normal issues
of compromise,
instead of looking at this, is
he fit to be
president of the United States?
That's a question
they want to avoid.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But what is the
-- what is
that -- again, I'm trying to get
at what the
thought process is, Mark.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: How is it that
some members
are finding him acceptable and
others are
still -- are holding out? And
Paul Ryan is
holding out, but the sense is
that he is going
to come around.
MARK SHIELDS: The question at
the office pool
is, will Bernie Sanders endorse
Hillary Clinton
before Paul Ryan endorses Donald
Trump?
But I don't think there's any
question, after
the post-session, that Paul Ryan
is heading
in that direction. Judy, if
you're running
for reelection, it's always
easier to run
on the same ticket with your
presidential
candidate lined up, because, for
your own
survival, if you break with the
presidential
candidate, that presidential
candidate has
some loyal supporters who may
exact retribution
on you, even though you're
running for the
House or the Senate, that you
turned your
back on our guy and punish you.
So, it's easier to do that. But,
you know,
I have to say, I think, in the
case of Lindsey
Graham -- this is projection on
my part -- why
he's going soft on Donald Trump
or sounding
softer, is that his best friend
in the world,
John McCain, is up for
reelection and in a
very difficult race in Arizona.
And Donald
Trump could be a liability
there. And he just
feels that, somehow, if he goes
easy, that
this will be less of a problem
for John McCain.
MICHAEL GERSON: Yes.
And I do have to say, we knew
this would happen.
When you get the nomination,
controlling the
party is powerful. But when you
see it in
reality, it's kind of revolting.
Somebody like Rick Perry, who
was the leading
critic of Donald Trump's
character early...
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
MICHAEL GERSON: ... talked about
him as a
cancer on conservatism, now
angling for a
vice presidential nod.
You see some -- a serious person
like Senator
Corker, who seems to have
ambitions in that
administration. It's a sad
thing, in many
ways, to watch what happens when
political
reality takes hold in these
cases.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you -- how
do Republicans
reconcile what appear to be
changing stances
on positions, on raising taxes
one day, saying,
no, I'm not raising taxes on the
wealthy the
next day, different statements
on whether
the wall is going to be built
and how high
it's going to be?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
Well, there's two things to bear
in mind.
Donald Trump has no public
record, OK? So,
he doesn't have policies. He's
never had policies,
never been a policy candidate.
He's disdained
white papers or think tanks or
anything of
the sort. He's been a campaign
of bumper stickers.
Build a wall. Make Mexico pay
for it. Take
it back. Send them back. Round
them all up.
That's it. So, as a consequence,
he has no
-- he has a very tenuous
connection with the
positions he's taken. I mean,
they're not
based upon votes or anything of
the sort.
MICHAEL GERSON: But I think it
is important.
You know, he doesn't have
consistent views.
When he changes his views, he
doesn't have
any reason for changing his
views, which is
just extraordinary.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
MICHAEL GERSON: But it calls
attention to
the fact that he was never
offering policy
from the first day of this
campaign.
MARK SHIELDS: No.
MICHAEL GERSON: On issues like
jobs, on issues
like immigration, what he's
arguing is that
he should be in charge.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
MICHAEL GERSON: OK?
This is an essentially
authoritarian appeal.
The people -- many people who
support him
are essentially giving up on
self-government,
saying he should take care of
it, he should
be in charge...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MICHAEL GERSON: ... when, in
fact, this is
pretty weak hands to put in
charge.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to save a
little bit
of time for the Democrats, Mark.
MARK SHIELDS: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bernie Sanders
won his 19th
primary this week, West
Virginia.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, he did.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there a chance
that he could
be the nominee of the Democratic
Party?
MARK SHIELDS: There's a chance,
a very, very
slim chance, probably not a
realistic chance.
Hillary Clinton has an air of
inevitability
about winning the nomination.
But Bernie Sanders
has momentum. He's won 11 of the
last 16 contests.
He's won the last two. He has --
both races
in May. He's on his way in
Oregon.
You know, so he has this sense.
And he made
a very strong statement on
Tuesday night,
that Donald Trump would be
elected over my
dead body. We're going to stop
him.
He opposed him. So, Hillary
Clinton would
like to be rid of Bernie
Sanders. Bernie Sanders
has a constituency of young
people, energy
and passion that she needs
desperately. She
needs desperately to win and her
campaign
needs that infusion of sort of
idealism. And
I think Bernie Sanders is
probably the only
agent who can deliver it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Michael, how does
this affect
what she needs to do between now
-- if she
is the nominee -- between now
and November,
the fact that he's still in here
and Donald
Trump sewed it up for the
Republicans?
MICHAEL GERSON: Well, we are
seeing a significant
-- she's won the nomination,
essentially,
not certainly, but essentially.
We're seeing that a significant
portion of
the Democratic Party wants to
humiliate her
eve, though she's won the
nomination. That
is a serious thing. It points
out that she's
not a particularly strong
candidate. Trump
and Hillary Clinton are some of
the least
liked politicians in America.
It's an extraordinary race.
There are many
people who are in the never
Trump camp, but
there's also a number of people
who are in
the never Hillary camp. And that
race could
be closer than people think.
MARK SHIELDS: But Bernie
Sanders, in his defense,
he has -- he wants his campaign
to have stood
for something. And it has. It
certainly has.
But he wants to carry it to the
fight for
the platform of the party, to
the positions.
I don't think it's humiliation
of her that
drives him at this point. I
mean, he's been
through all of this for so long,
and he wants
his people to have their moment
in the sun.
I think it's absolutely natural.
MICHAEL GERSON: But the alarm
bells are going
off. So, you have senators
pressuring him
to get out of the race because
Trump looks
stronger than they thought.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's a new
phenomenon.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Gentlemen, we
thank you both.
We're going to leave it there.
Michael Gerson, Mark Shields,
thank you.
Each year, thousands of
seemingly healthy
young people suddenly die. And,
in many cases,
doctors aren't able to determine
the cause.
Scientists in San Diego are
starting to solve
some of these medical mysteries
through a
process called genetic
sequencing. What they're
learning can have a profound
ripple effect
on surviving family members.
Science reporter David Wagner
from our member
station KPBS in San Diego
reports.
DAVID WAGNER: Dardie Robinson
leads a typical
life in Portland, Oregon. She
spends her days
working as a paralegal and
catching up with
all the kids she has raised.
But unknown to her, she was
carrying a genetic
mutation that left her and
family members
vulnerable to sudden heart
failure. A year-and-a-half
ago, she received an unexpected
call. It was
about her son, Daniel.
DARDIE ROBINSON, Mother: I got a
call out
of the blue from his girlfriend.
And -- sorry
-- she said that paramedics were
there working
on Daniel, that she had found
him, that he
was blue and unresponsive.
And I told her, I said, "Tell
him his momma
loves him."
And she said, "Well, I'm sure he
can't hear
you."
I said, "Tell him anyway."
And so she did.
DAVID WAGNER: In tears, she left
the office
and got in her car.
DARDIE ROBINSON: And on the way
home, I got
the call that there was nothing
they could
do, and that he was gone.
DAVID WAGNER: Daniel was 29 and
otherwise
healthy. No one knew why he had
died so suddenly.
DARDIE ROBINSON: That was, to
me, part of
the -- really the worst part, is
because the
word to us initially was, they
thought that
he must have committed suicide,
he must have
taken something. And I kept
saying, that doesn't
make sense.
DAVID WAGNER: An autopsy pointed
to problems
with his heart. And while she
was relieved
suicide was ruled out, the
autopsy left her
unsettled.
If this could kill Daniel at 29,
could it
strike her other biological
children?
DARDIE ROBINSON: That was the
question. Is
it going to happen again? Which
one of my
kids? Me? I'm OK if it's me, but
I'm not OK
if it's my kids.
DAVID WAGNER: Not long after she
received
the autopsy report, Dardie read
a Los Angeles
Times story about a study
happening in San
Diego.
Scientists at the Scripps
Translational Science
Institute were using gene
sequencing to take
another look at cases like her
son's. They
wanted to perform what they
called molecular
autopsies.
Scripps research Ali Torkamani
says one of
the reasons they agreed to take
on Daniel's
case was a strong family history
of early
heart failure.
ALI TORKAMANI, Scripps
Translational Science
Institute: The fact that there
was more than
one sudden death in the family
at a young
age sort of highlighted the
point for us,
this is likely a genetic issue.
DAVID WAGNER: Daniel, at 29, was
by far the
youngest.
DARDIE ROBINSON: So, this was my
dad. He as
in the Navy.
DAVID WAGNER: But a number of
Dardie's relatives
had died from sudden heart
failure in their
40s and 50s.
DARDIE ROBINSON: And then
there's little Mr.
Daniel.
DAVID WAGNER: With strong clues
that Daniel's
death may have been related to
his DNA, the
Scripps researchers sequenced
genes from Daniel's
heart tissue. They also
sequenced his parents'
genes.
ALI TORKAMANI: And that's when
we found this
mutation in this gene, TRPM4.
DAVID WAGNER: Torkamani says
mutations on
this gene have been known to
cause a disorder
called progressive familial
heart block. It
short-circuits the heart's
electrical signals,
eventually causing the heart to
just stop
beating.
ALI TORKAMANI: And it's that
mutation that
we believe is the cause of
sudden death in
Daniel and in other family
members.
DARDIE ROBINSON: "The mutation
is likely to
be positive for sudden death."
DAVID WAGNER: The researchers
found the same
mutation in Dardie, who had
passed it down
to Daniel. And because it's an
autosomal dominant
gene, there's a 50 percent
chance she passed
it down to her other children
too.
Scripps director Eric Topol
oversees the study.
He says Dardie's case
illustrates how a genetic
discovery in cases like this can
provide valuable,
even lifesaving information to
surviving family
members.
DARDIE ROBINSON: There, he was
brand-new,
brand-new baby.
ERIC TOPOL, Director, Scripps
Translational
Science Institute: Because this
is something
that is eminently preventable
with things
like a defibrillator. So,
whereas all these
relatives through many
generations had sudden
death, we may be able to
actually preempt
this in the future.
DAVID WAGNER: Dardie is now
considering getting
a surgically implanted device to
protect her
heart from what happened to
Daniel's. She's
also on a mission to get
relatives on her
side of the family tested for
the mutation.
DARDIE ROBINSON: Daniel did
something significant.
He gave us answers that will
benefit not just
dozens, but potentially, down
the road, hundreds
of people, maybe even thousands,
because I
don't believe that this is just
limited to
my family.
DAVID WAGNER: Not every case
Scripps looks
at is this clear-cut. But the
researchers
say certain discoveries they're
making could
end up preventing other sudden
deaths.
If this new approach to
autopsies becomes
more common, researchers say,
perhaps, in
the future, fewer families will
have to live
with the pain of not knowing how
their loved
one died.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
David Wagner in
San Diego.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Many schools have adopted
zero-tolerance
policies on bullying. But are
these punishments
working to reduce the problem?
Columnist Wendy
Thomas Russell remembers her own
third-grade
bully and wonders if he suffered
even more
than she did.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs
from our PBS colleagues.
Tonight on "Washington Week":
Republicans
try to find unity, while Hillary
Clinton fights
a two-front campaign. And the
Obama administration's
action on transgender rights
raises questions
about civil rights and privacy.
That's later tonight on
"Washington Week."
And on "PBS NewsHour Weekend":
As Puerto Rico
struggles a huge national debt
and the Zika
virus, it's working to solve
another crisis,
where to put the garbage.
Here's a preview.
NARRATOR: During the past 30
years, the Environmental
Protection Agency has ordered
the closure
of more than 50 landfills across
the island
for leakage issues contaminating
groundwater
and not being up to
environmental standards.
The landfill closures make
garbage disposal
even more challenging for
residents along
the Martin Pena Channel. The
channel was once
400-feet-wide and 10-feet-deep,
popular for
swimming and fishing. Today, the
waterway,
clogged with garbage and sewage,
has shrunk
to 30-feet-wide and
three-feet-deep.
It is a magnet for mosquitoes,
potentially
carrying the Zika virus, at a
time when 700
people on the island have
already been infected
with Zika.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
night on "PBS
NewsHour Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday with
a look at the split between
radical and moderate
Islam in the Balkans decades
after a divisive
war.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.